


                                  - 1 -



       1.  Introduction

       This document provides an overview of the SGI Message
       Passing Toolkit (MPT) for release 1.9.

       MPT is a software package that supports interprocess data
       exchange for applications that use concurrent, cooperating
       processes on a single host or on multiple hosts. Data
       exchange is done through message passing, which is the use
       of library calls to request data delivery from one process
       to another or between groups of processes.

       This release of MPT does not support MPI jobs across
       heterogeneous clusters.

       The MPT package contains the following components and
       accompanying documentation:

          +o Message Passing Interface.

          +o Logically shared, distributed memory (SHMEM) data
            passing routines.

       The MPI component of MPT is based on industry standards for
       the message passing programming model. These components also
       contain enhancements specific to SGI systems. For a
       description of MPI, see the Message Passing Toolkit: MPI
       Programmer's Manual.  SHMEM man pages are available online
       only.

       NOTE:  Previous releases of MPT also included PVM (Parallel
       Virtual Machine).  With the MPT 1.6 release, PVM 3.3 was
       unbundled and is now available as a stand-alone product via
       the SGI Download Cool Software (DCS) web site.
       http://www.sgi.com/products/evaluation/

       These release notes include the following chapters:

         1.  Introduction

         2.  MPT Installation for IRIX Systems

         3.  MPT Installation for Linux Systems

         4.  New Features

         5.  Closed PVs

         6.  Compatibilities and Dependencies













                                  - 2 -



         7.  Known Problems and Workarounds

         8.  Documentation

         9.  Customer Services


       1.1  ReleaseIdentificationInformation

       The release identification for MPT release is as follows:

       SSSSooooffffttttwwwwaaaarrrreeee pppprrrroooodddduuuucccctttt                  Message Passing Toolkit

       VVVVeeeerrrrssssiiiioooonnnn                           1.9

       SSSSooooffffttttwwwwaaaarrrreeee rrrreeeeqqqquuuuiiiirrrreeeemmmmeeeennnnttttssss      IRIX:  SGI MIPS based systems
                                         running IRIX release 6.5 or later

                                         Array Services software
                                         version 3.4 or later and any
                                         Array Services patches that
                                         are appropriate for the version
                                         of IRIX and Array Services
                                         on your system


                                  Linux: SGI Altix 3000 systems running
                                         SGI Propack.   SGI Propack 2.3
                                         is recommended.

       1.2  DistributionofTheseReleaseNotes

       For IRIX systems:

         After you have installed the online release notes (the
         relnotes subsystem), you can view the release notes on
         your screen.

         If you have a graphics system, select Release Notes from
         the Help submenu of the Toolchest. This invokes the
         grelnotes graphical browser for the online release notes.
         For options to this command, see the ggggrrrreeeellllnnnnooootttteeeessss(1) man
         page.

         If you do not have a graphics system, you can use the
         rrrreeeellllnnnnooootttteeeessss(1) command to access the online release notes.


       For Linux systems:













                                  - 3 -



         You can access the release notes from the following
         location:

            ////uuuussssrrrr////sssshhhhaaaarrrreeee////ddddoooocccc////ssssggggiiii----mmmmpppptttt----1111....9999////RRRREEEEAAAADDDDMMMMEEEE....rrrreeeellllnnnnooootttteeeessss

       1.3  ProductDescription

       The MPT package contains the following subcomponents:

          +o Message Passing Interface (MPI)

          +o Logically shared, distributed memory (SHMEM) data
            passing routines

       The MPI component of MPT includes a library of
       communications and synchronization functions that are
       necessary for writing distributed applications. For example,
       you can add calls that cause one task to send a message to
       another, or to receive a message, or to wait until another
       task is finished.

       To use MPI or SHMEM message passing directly, you must
       change your source code to add the appropriate calls.


       1.3.1  MessagePassingInterface(MPI)
       SGI MPI is an optimized version of the Message Passing
       Interface (MPI) created by the Message Passing Interface
       Forum (MPIF). SGI MPI is the full implementation of the MPI
       1.2 specification.  In addition, the following MPI-2
       features have been added to this library:

         Parallel I/O
         One sided put/get model messaging
         MMMMPPPPIIIICCCCoooommmmmmmmssssppppaaaawwwwnnnn/MMMMPPPPIIIICCCCoooommmmmmmmssssppppaaaawwwwnnnnmmmmuuuullllttttiiiipppplllleeee
         MMMMPPPPIIIIAAAAllllllllooooccccmmmmeeeemmmm/MMMMPPPPIIIIFFFFrrrreeeeeeeemmmmeeeemmmm
         Transfer handles
         Replacements for deprecated MPI-1 functions
         Generalized Requests

       MPI is a standard specification for message passing
       libraries, allowing portable message passing programs in the
       Fortran and C languages. MPI is not sanctioned or supported
       by any official standards organization. Its goal was to
       develop a widely used standard for writing message passing
       programs. The implementation of this standard includes the
       lllliiiibbbbmmmmppppiiii....ssssoooo and lllliiiibbbbmmmmppppiiii++++++++....ssssoooo libraries, a run-time command
       (mmmmppppiiiirrrruuuunnnn(1)), the lllliiiibbbbxxxxmmmmppppiiii....ssssoooo library, and allows for
       profiling of message passing applications













                                  - 4 -



       1.3.2  LogicallyShared,DistributedMemory(SHMEM)
       SHMEM data passing is another form of distributed
       programming. It differs from MPI message passing in that it
       uses one-sided communication. One processing element (PE)
       can send or receive data from a remote PE without direct
       participation by the remote PE.

       SHMEM data passing capability is similar to that of the MPI
       one-sided functions defined in Chapter 6 of the MPI-2
       specification.


       1.4  ProductSupport

       SGI provides a comprehensive product support maintenance
       program for its products. If you are in the U.S. or Canada
       and would like support for your supported products, contact
       the Technical Assistance Center at (800) 800-4SGI.  If you
       are outside these areas, contact the SGI subsidiary or
       authorized distributor in your country.



       1.5  ReaderComments

       If you have comments about the technical accuracy, content,
       or organization of this document, please tell us. Be sure to
       include the title and part number of the document with your
       comments.

       You can contact us in any of the following ways:

          +o Send e-mail to the following address:

               tttteeeecccchhhhppppuuuubbbbssss@@@@ssssggggiiii....ccccoooommmm

          +o Send a fax to the attention of "Technical Publications"
            at: +1-650-932-0801.

          +o Use the Feedback option on the Technical Publications
            Library World Wide Web page:

               hhhhttttttttpppp::::////////ddddooooccccssss....ssssggggiiii....ccccoooommmm

          +o Call the Technical Publications Group, through the
            Technical Assistance Center at 1-800-800-4SGI

          +o Send mail to the following address:

            Technical Publications SGI 1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy.
            Mountain View, California 94043-1351











                                  - 5 -



       We value your comments and will respond to them promptly.


























































